JUDY WOODRUFF: The downing of
a Syrian air force fighter jet
by an American strike aircraft
is just the latest
flash point that perhaps
signals a deepening
American involvement in
Syria's many-sided civil war.
John Yang begins our coverage.
JOHN YANG: America's
top military commander,
Marine General Joseph
Dunford, made no apology
today for Sunday's downing
of a Syrian warplane.
GEN.
JOSEPH DUNFORD, Joint Chiefs of
Staff Chairman: We made every
effort to warn those individuals
not to come any closer, and then
the commander made a judgment
that there was a threat to
the forces that we were
supporting and took action.
The only actions that we
have taken against pro-regime
forces in Syria, and there have
been two specific incidents,
have been in self-defense.
JOHN YANG: Earlier this month,
the U.S. struck pro-Assad
forces approaching an important
U.S.-British special
forces base in At Tanf
in Southeastern Syria.
In response to Sunday's
shoot-down, Russia,
which backs Syrian
President Bashar al-Assad,
said it now considers all U.S.
aircraft in the region a threat.
In a statement, the Defense
Ministry said: "All flying
objects, including planes and
drones of the international
coalition, detected west of the
Euphrates will be followed by
Russian air defense
systems as targets."
Russia also said it suspended
a military hot line with the
U.S. designed to coordinate
air missions in the region.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei
Lavrov called for dialogue.
SERGEI LAVROV, Russian Foreign
Minister (through translator):
We call on everybody to avoid
unilateral actions, to
respect, I stress once
again, Syria's sovereignty.
JOHN YANG: The Pentagon
said it's repositioning
jets over Syria to ensure
the safety of American
air crews.
All this further complicates the
already messy picture in Syria.
In recent weeks, U.S.
forces have ramped up
airstrikes to back the
so-called Syrian Democratic
Forces, or SDF, a rebel
coalition battling ISIS around
its stronghold in Raqqa.
Syrian President Assad, backed
by Russia, has used jets to
support pro-regime groups
in the same area.
Said to be battling ISIS,
those fighters have also
clashed with the SDF.
Further complicating matters,
Iran's supports for Assad.
But, yesterday, Iran's
military launched its own
missile strike on ISIS
positions, in retaliation
for the group's attack
in Tehran two weeks ago.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm John Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more
on yesterday's shoot-down,
and the wider picture of a
very complex battlefield,
I'm joined now by Andrew Exum.
He was deputy assistant
secretary of defense for Middle
East policy from 2015 to 2016,
and is now a contributing
editor at "The Atlantic."
And Faysal Itani, he's a senior
fellow in the Rafik Hariri
Center for the Middle East
at the Atlantic Council.
It's a Washington think tank.
And, gentlemen, thank
you both for joining us.
This is a complicated
battlefield we're talking about.
Faysal Itani, I'm going
to start with you.
Given that, was this inevitable
that this was going to happen,
or should the U.S. been
able to avoid it?
FAYSAL ITANI, Atlantic Council's
Rafik Hariri Center for the
Middle East: Well, I think
it's very difficult to get
the Syrian regime to behave in
accordance with any external
powers, understand and
come to an agreement over.
This was clearly a case of the
regime behaving in a manner that
probably upset the Russians,
may or may not have
upset the Iranians.
I'm not sure.
And certainly the United
States didn't like it.
I think the regime will continue
to behave in that manner
and I think we're going to
continue to have to either
react or back down or ignore it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will talk
about that in just a moment.
Andrew Exum, in your view, was
this inevitable, it was going
to happen just because of the
kind of war that is
being fought there?
ANDREW EXUM, Former U.S. Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense:
Well, I think what Faysal
said is very wise, and that
often we have seen the tail
wag the dog with respect to
the Syrian regime and
its external sponsors.
Often, they have not carried
out what Russia or Iran
would like them to do.
So, I think that's very wise.
I would also say, however, that
where we are in the military
campaign against the Islamic
State means that U.S. and
other coalition forces are
going to be in closer proximity
to Syrian regime forces.
Now, you know, the legal
and policy assumptions
that underpin the U.S.
and coalition war against
the Islamic State was that the
Syrian regime couldn't exert
any type of sovereignty east,
where the Islamic
State has been.
That's beginning to change,
and the coalition is starting
to spread out as well.
So, unfortunately, you're
seeing those forces in greater
proximity, and I expect you are
going to see more of these
incidents in the future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that your
expectation, that this is just
getting more complicated by the
day, practically?
FAYSAL ITANI: I think we're
getting closer to our primary
objectives towards ISIS, which
is to take a certain amount
of core territory in Eastern
Syria and especially around the
Raqqa province.
So, yes, physically, it brings
us in greater proximity, but
it also poses a threat to the
regime that we may end up
actually handing over very
important strategic territory to
our own allies, whether
it's Arabs or most likely
the Kurdish-dominated SDF.
And that includes
water resources.
It includes oil resources.
And so now that the regime
has stabilized the west enough
to be able to throw forces
elsewhere, and Iran has as
well, then they're coming in
our direction, and I don't think
we have a long-term
plan for that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I do want
to ask you both about that.
But, Andrew Exum,
I was struck today.
The Russians came -- right out
of the box, they were saying
they're now going to target
any U.S. plane -- I'm sorry --
any plane by the U.S. coalition
that goes into a certain
area.
Is this just ripe for
either another strike
or miscalculation?
ANDREW EXUM: Yes and no.
Yes, of course,
this is worrying.
I think it's going to
be a real concern to
our coalition partners.
It's a pretty robust
integrated air defense
system over most of Syria.
And that is not a fun thing
to fly around and through.
Their air defenses are actually
not as strong in the east.
Russia also cut off the
deconfliction hot line.
I wouldn't read
too much into that.
They have done it before.
It in Russia's interests
to be able to deconflict
our air operations,
just as much as it is
in the interests of
the United States and
the coalition partners.
So, I suspect that, once the
temperatures cool a little
bit, that those deconfliction
channels will be up
and running again.
But, obviously, it's worrying.
And the Russians, of course,
will use this as an opportunity
to convince the Americans
that we need to be working
closer together in Syria,
which is something that we have
been, for obvious reasons,
quite resistant to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
So, Faysal Itani, this does pull
the U.S. closer in, doesn't it?
FAYSAL ITANI: I think what
we have tried to do so far in
the war is, we have tried to
sort of tiptoe around the
western part of the country,
the war in the west, what we
call the civil war usually in
our discourse, and focus on
the war that we wish to fight,
which is the war against ISIS.
I think this is a sign that,
actually, as far as the
players with the most at stake
here, Iran and the Syrian
regime, are concerned,
these are not separate wars.
This is all war over
territory and over resources
and over influence.
And I think we are having to
come to a conclusion, that we're
stumbling into it somewhat, but
I think we will get there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it
possible, Andrew Exum,
to separate the two?
ANDREW EXUM: Well, I
think Faysal is right.
On the one hand, I think the
regime still has quite a lot
of consolidation to do in
Western Syria, but I think
Faysal is correct in that the
regime still yearns after the
oil and gas resources that
are in the east of Syria.
And I think, quite frankly, the
regime's Iranian backers want
some sort of land bridge into
Iraq, which is why the Euphrates
River Valley is so important
to perhaps not as much as
the regime, but certainly
to its Iranian supporters
and to Hezbollah as well.
So, yes, to Faysal is right.
The strategic geography does
not end in Western Syria.
It extends to the east as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to ask
both of you if it's clear to
you -- Faysal Itani, to you
first.
Is it clear to you what the
goal of the U.S. mission
right now is in Syria?
FAYSAL ITANI: Well, the official
goal is clear enough, which
is, we're there to defeat ISIS,
to displace it from Raqqa
and other territories.
What exactly the territorial
scope of that is, is not clear.
But what we're actually doing
as this conflict evolves and
unfolds and more dimensions are
added to it, no, I don't
think -- it's not clear to me.
I don't even know if it's
clear to us, to be honest with
you, because I don't know how
important we think it
is to compete with the
Iranians and the Syrian
regime over this territory
and over influence
in post-ISIS Syria.
It seems like we
haven't made a decision.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you answer
that question, Andrew Exum?
ANDREW EXUM: Well, I
think largely the same.
I will say that the
United States has first
off had a legal basis and
has had policy agreement
on defeating the Islamic State.
So that's been where the U.S.
military and its coalition
partners have been focused.
There has not been consensus
or even a legal basis to carry
that fight over to the Assad
regime.
And so I think the United States
and its coalition partners have
some real hard choices going
forward.
And when I say coalition
partners, I don't just mean the
international community, but
I mean the partners
on the ground as well.
For example, when they defeat
the Islamic State -- and the
Islamic State is going to
be defeated -- or is the United
States fine with the territory
that's been won back from
the Islamic State falling into
the hands of the Assad regime?
Is that an appropriate or
acceptable policy outcome?
If it's not, then I think
some decisions are going to
have to be made quite quickly.
Otherwise, we're going
to end up stumbling
into a broader conflict
without a clear strategy
to win that conflict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And wrapping
up, Faysal Itani, how urgent
is it that the U.S. make these
decisions?
FAYSAL ITANI: Very
urgent, because these
things that you saw today
and have been happening
over the -- actually over the
past few weeks, and they haven't
been happening only as sort
of airstrike incidents.
There was actually a
ground attack on our
partners in Northern Syria.
I'm a bit scared that it hasn't
-- it doesn't appear to have
actually been wrapped up yet
as a strategic discussion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean
by the administration.
FAYSAL ITANI: By the United
States government, yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly,
Andrew Exum, how do you see the
pressure on the administration
to make this decision?
ANDREW EXUM: Well, I think
there are competing voices
within the administration.
I think the military has
been almost myopically
focused on defeating the
Islamic State, because
that's the mission
they have been given.
I think there are also some
strong voices within the
administration that would like
to broaden this conflict in
order to focus on Iran and
Iran's proxies in Syria.
That's quite
dangerous, obviously.
That could be especially
dangerous to get in that type
of escalation without having
the forces on the ground.
And there is also no
consensus with the United
States' international
partners regarding that
goal.
So, I think, unfortunately,
the administration has
yet to make up its mind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nothing
simple about this one.
Andrew Exum, Faysal
Itani, thank you both.
FAYSAL ITANI: Thank you.